# LCC 6502 C Compiler

This project is to create a modern C compiler for the MOS 6502. When finished,
it will allow writing performance-sensitive projects for the Atari 800 (and
eventually other 6502 platforms) entirely in C, without any hand-written
assembly.

## Project Status

This project is gathering requirements, and nothing useful has been designed or
implemented yet. Check back later for updates.

Updated December 30, 2018.

## Requirements

[Requirements](Requirements.md) have been collected by analyzing the ANSI C
standard, the programming manuals for the Atari 800 and the Commodore 64, and
the NMOS and CMOS 6502 instruction set and quirks.

## Project Design

The project is currently under [design](Design.md).

To understand the problem space and potential solution techniques, start with
David A. Wheeler's excellent [guide](https://dwheeler.com/6502/).

The LCC compiler has been chosen as a C frontend for its simplicity, standards
compliance, and excellent documentation. It's backend interface
[documentation](http://storage.webhop.net/documents/interface4.pdf) is freely
available.  The relevant parts of the compiler are in the [lcc/](lcc/)
subdirectory.

### Work Items

* [ ] Develop Atari 800 diskette acceptance test.
* [ ] Develop Atari 800 USR statement acceptance test.
* [ ] Develop Atari 800 cassette acceptance test.
* [ ] Develop Commodore cartridge acceptance test.
* [ ] Develop Commodore disk `LOAD` acceptance test.
* [ ] Develop Atari 800 DOS 2.5 load acceptance test.
* [ ] Develop all necesary NMOS vs CMOS acceptance tests.
* [ ] Develop C standard acceptance tests.
* [ ] Organize known design considerations (knowns).
* [ ] Collect design questions (unknowns) to be answered by design spikes.

## For More Details

### [Implementation-Defined Behavior](Implementation_Defined_Behavior.md)

The C89 standard requires a conforming implementation to document a number of
"implementation-defined" behaviors and characteristics. All such definitions
can be found at the link above.

### [Linker Scripts](Linker_Scripts.md)

The provided linker performs most of the actual code generation of the
compiler. It takes a description of the execution environment, as well as a
number of Intermediate Representation object files generated by the frontend,
and generates one or more ASM files corresponding to various regions of the
program. The programmer can then combine these ASM files into a loadable
binary image.

This document describes the TOML-based language used to describe the
execution environment and how the C inputs relate to it.

### [Requirements](Requirements.md)

The C standard, the nature of the processor, and the nature of each target
platform each place specific requirements on the implementation. Any
non-trivial requirements are collected here.

### [Design](Design.md)

This will be a broad overview of the design of the compiler. WIP.

### Prototype ([prototype/](prototype/))

A basic proof-of-concept prototype for the compiler.

### LCC ([lcc/](lcc/))

The relevant parts of the LCC compiler. Currently just the C preprocessor and C
compiler proper. All other backends except "bytecode" have been removed.

### Other Resources

For a very detailed description of the behavior of the 6510 processor (the
variation of the 6502 used in the Commodore 64), see
[64doc.txt](http://www.atarihq.com/danb/files/64doc.txt). The 6510's instuction
set and behavior is essentially the same as the 6502 for the purposes of this
compiler.

## Other Approaches

### CC65

Word around the Internet is that CC65 (an existing C compiler) produces output
that is much slower than human-written assembly.  For example, blogger XtoF
[attempted](https://www.xtof.info/blog/?p=714) to use CC65 to write a simple
game of life implementation for the Apple II. While the compiler produced
correct code and was easy to use, the [results](https://youtu.be/1twMsK6wXgg)
were too slow to be practical.  Examining the output revealed that the inner
loop of the simulation, a tight 7 line C routine, had been transformed to over
200 instructions, including many subroutine calls. A hand-written assembly
routine, exactly following the C instructions, would have been only a dozen or
so instructions.

Modern C compilers provide an essential fiction: the system appears to natively
run C. While it's usually quite trivial for an assembly author to beat a C
compiler (especially on as simple a CPU as the 6502), it's usually not
worthwhile to do so, since the gains are usually minor.  CC65 broadly violates
this property. As a result, even though most of the project can be written in C,
all inner loops stil need to be written in assembly.  Instead, a C compiler
should allow writing a full project end-to-end in C, even the parts that need to
be (reasonably) fast.

### Why not [PLASMA](https://github.com/dschmenk/PLASMA)/[Atalan](http://atalan.kutululu.org/)/[Forth](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Forth_(programming_language))/etc.?

These aren't C. C is a nice language that everyone and their mother knows; these
languages are a bit more on the esoteric side of the tracks.

### Compile to PLASMA

A C compiler is expected to produce native machine code, suitable for tight
interrupt handlers and real-time routines.  When writing these in C, one loses
the cycle-per-cycle control of the CPU one has in assembly, but one gains ease
of use and super-human efficiency in register and memory allocation. Compiling
to a virtual machine like PLASMA would prevent writing such routines in C, since
the indirection cost would be too high.
